# Rsyslog - Flow Controls between Inputs and Outputs

## Background

The logging role defines `rsyslog_default` variable to deploy the original, all-in-one rsyslog configuration file rsyslog.conf.
It configures to get inputs from `imjournal` and output to the local files in /var/log.
It was originally added to provide "noop" to the logging role.
Then, it was utilized to support for the local system logs to store into the local files combining with the openshift logging in the ovirt logging.
In the linux-system-roles review process, some critical questions on `rsyslog_default` were raised, such as the original intention - providing "noop" is not the style ansible recommends and no other linux-system-roles do not nor will not have such a default variable.
Considering the inputs, the functionality that `rsyslog_default` offers has to be achieved by the logging role itself instead of copying the hardcoded rsyslog.conf to the target host.

This proposal will discuss about these items:
- how to replace the `rsyslog_default` variable with the logging role inputs/outputs configuration.
- how to support more generic way to connect inputs and outputs.

Please note that this github commit starting this doc implements the first cut of the proposal including:
- inputs - basics input role (`imjournal`, `imuxsock`, `imudp`, `imptcp`) and files input role (`imfile`) [0], and
- outputs - files output role (`omfile`), forwards output role (`omfwd`) and elasticsearch role (`omelasticsearch`).
Leftover tasks, other roles to be changed and eliminating `rsyslog_default`, are discussed in [To Do's](#to-dos).

[0] - ovirt, viaq, and viaq-k8s need to update to support the flow controls.

## How the flow controle works

### Outputs
Each output action is in the ruleset which name is the logging_outputs name.

Output config file name is constructed of prefix 2 digits, `output`, type of the output, and type of configuration or the unique name of the output item concatinated by `-` with suffix `.conf`. For instance, an elasticsearch config file defining the module is `10-output-elasticsearch-module.conf`, where `elasticsearch` is the type of output, and `module` is the type of configuration. Another example, a output files config file which item has the unique name `files_output` is 30-output-files-files_output.conf. The 2 digits are defined in rsyslog_weight_map as described in [templates](rsyslog_templates.md). Also, it could be reassigned in each internal __rsyslog_rules.

Looking into the contents of the action configuration file, one configuration file contains one action wrapped in a ruleset with a unique name. The following ruleset example has the name `files_output` and is for logging the messages in the local file /var/log/messages. This output type is `files`.  Log messages are passed to the ruleset by "call files_output" from an input.
```
=> 30-output-files-files_output.conf <==
ruleset(name="files_output") {
  *.info;authpriv.none;auth.none;cron.none;mail.none /var/log/messages
}
```
This is generated by this set of configuration parameters, which would be explained below.
```
logging_outputs
  - name: files_output
    type: files
    severity: info
    exclude: [authpriv.none, auth.none, cron.none, mail.none]
    path: /var/log/messages
```

### Inputs
The logging_inputs variables in the inventory specifies the input methods (plugins) to get the log messages.
Currently, basics type (`imjournal` and `imtcp`, `imptcp`, `imudp`) and files type (`imfiles) are supported.

The file's naming convention is similar to the outputs. When the input type can have multiple logging inputs such has reading from log files, the same number of input configuration files are generated and its name is constructed of prefix 2 digits, `input`, type of the input, and the unique name of the input item concatinated by `-` with suffix `.conf`.

The contents of an input configuration file has the caller point to the ruleset name in the output configuration based on the flow definition described next.

### Flows to define the Input and Output Relationships
Based upon the flows definition in the inventory that customers provide, input config jumps to the ruleset.
The next `imjournal` (basics) example shows log messages read from journald by the `imjournal` plugin are logged in the local files.

**`imjournal` example**
Log messages from journald are read by `imjournal`.  Then, they are passed to the files output by calling `files_output0` and `files_output1` ruleset.
```
=> 10-input-basics-modules.conf <==
# Ansible managed

#
# System log messages
#
# Log messages sent to local UNIX socket
module(load="imuxsock"    # provides support for local system logging (e.g. via logger command)
       SysSock.Use="off") # Turn off message reception via local log socket.
# Read from journald
module(load="imjournal"
       StateFile="/var/lib/rsyslog/imjournal.state"
       RateLimit.Burst="20000"
       RateLimit.Interval="600"
       PersistStateInterval="10")

==> 11-input-basics-basic_input.conf <==
# Ansible managed

if
  ($inputname == "imjournal")
  then {
    call files_output0
}
if
  ($inputname == "imjournal")
  then {
    call files_output1
}
```

**`imfile` example**
The next `imfile` example shows log messages read from /var/log/inputdirectory/*.log by the `imfile` plugin are tagged with the input name `files_input0` then passed to the output ruleset specified by `files_output0` and `files_output1`.
```
==> 90-input-files-files_input0.conf <==
# Ansible managed

input(type="imfile" file="/var/log/inputdirectory/*.log" tag="files_input0")
if
  ($syslogtag == "files_input0")
  then {
    call files_output0
}
if
  ($syslogtag == "files_input0")
  then {
    call files_output1
}
```

### Inventory variable changes
Here is an example that the inputs from `imjournal` (basics) are logged in the local file;
the inputs from `imfile` (files) are forwarded to the remote host in addition to the local file,

**New style**
```
logging_outputs:
  - name: forward-output
    type: forwards
    protocol: tcp
    target: remote_host_name.remote_domain_name
    port: 514
  - name: file-output
    type: files
logging_inputs:
  - name: basic-input
    type: basics
  - name: file-input
    type: files
logging_flows:
  - name: flow0
    inputs: [basic-input]
    outputs: [file-output]
  - name: flow1
    inputs: [file-input]
    outputs: [file-output, forward-output]
```
In the new configuration style, logging_inputs (input tasks) do not belong to logging_outputs (output tasks), but in the same level. The relationship between the inputs and the outputs are represented by logging_flow with the subvariables `inputs` and `outputs`.  The `inputs` variable stores the list of the names of inputs and `outputs` does the list of the names of outputs.

For the comparison, here is the previous style, in which logging_inputs (input roles) used to belong to logging_outputs (output roles) to specify the relationship between the input and the output roles.

**Previous style**
```
logging_outputs:
  - name: forward-output
    type: forwards
    rsyslog_forwards_actions:
      - name: to-remote
        protocol: tcp
        target: remote_host_name.remote_domain_name
        port: 514
    logging_inputs:
      - name: basic-input
        type: basics
  - name: file-output
    type: files
    logging_inputs:
      - name: file-input
        type: files
```
In the above example, the inputs from imjournal (basic-input) are forwarded to the remote host (forward-output); the inputs from imfile (file-input) are stored in the local file (file-output).

With this style, it is not straightforward to implement one input to send multiple outputs in the logging roles.
Moreover, to configure the input from `imjournal` to send both the remote host and the local file,
the basics input would be placed under both forwards and files outputs as follows.
It could give an impression basic-input0 and basic-input1 could be configured independently, but it is not.
There is only one `imjournal` input and most likely the first one is wiped out.
If possible, we should avoid this type of confusions in the designing phase.

**Previous style example with uncertainty**
```
logging_outputs:
  - name: forward-output
    type: forwards
    rsyslog_forwards_actions:
      - name: to-remote
        protocol: tcp
        target: remote_host_name.remote_domain_name
        port: 514
    logging_inputs:
      - name: basic-input0
        type: basics
        rsyslog_imjournal_persist_state_interval: 1000
        rsyslog_imjournal_ratelimit_interval: 10
        rsyslog_imjournal_ratelimit_burst: 100000
  - name: file-output
    type: files
    logging_inputs:
      - name: basic-input1
        type: basics
        rsyslog_imjournal_persist_state_interval: 3000
        rsyslog_imjournal_ratelimit_interval: 30
        rsyslog_imjournal_ratelimit_burst: 300000
```

### logging_outputs, logging_inputs and rsyslog_use_OUTPUT_ruleset
This is a typical example of the configuration.
In logging_outputs, the to-be-configured output roles are listed.
In logging_inputs, the to-be-configure input roles are listed.
```
logging_outputs:
  - name: forward-output
    type: forwards
    protocol: tcp
    target: remote_host_name.remote_domain_name
    port: 514
  - name: file-output
    type: files
logging_inputs:
  - name: basic-input
    type: basics
  - name: file-input
    type: files
logging_flows:
  - name: flow0
    inputs: [basic-input]
    outputs: [file-output]
  - name: flow1
    inputs: [file-input]
    outputs: [file-output, forward-output]
```
There are some exceptions.
- The files output is configured, by default. That is, even if there is no logging_outputs is given, the `files` output config file is deployed. The filters and the actions in the configuration file (30-output-files.conf) are equivalent to the ones in the original rsyslog.conf.

Using the exception rules, this snippet of the inventory variables will configure equivalent to the original rsyslog.conf. Note: rsyslog_default is going to be eliminated next.
```
logging_enabled: true
rsyslog_default: false
logging_inputs:
  - name: basic_input
    type: basics
```

## To Do's
### Input type ovirt
The input ovirt is made from two inputs (`imfile`, `imtcp`) and the formatting part.
The target outputs are fixed and no need to be configured by the users in the inventory file. (Please correct if this assumption is wrong.)
Reading the ovirt/defaults/main.yml,
if the condition `{% if collect_ovirt_vdsm_log or collect_ovirt_engine_log %}` or
` $syslogtag startswith 'collectd'` is true, the log message is stored in the elasticsearch only. -- [1]
Otherwise, the logs are stored in the elasticsearch as well as in the local files (by the original rsyslog.conf).
That is, the code would be changed so that:
- If the conditions [1] are satisfied, the logs are to be sent to the elasticsearch output only by `call unique_elasticsearch_output_name`.
- Otherwise, `call unique_elasticsearch_output_name` and `call files`, by which the logs are sent to the both outputs.
If this change works as expected, we could safely eliminate rsyslog_default and 40-send-targets-only.conf with .send_targets_only that reduces an extra config file.

There is a test case tests_files_elasticsearch.yml in the tests directory (WARNING: It is not tested with elasticsearch yet. It just checks the syntax of the rsyslog config files.)

### Input viaq + viaq-k8s
The input viaq and viaq-k8s are tightly coupled,
where viaq is made from the `imfile` module call and the viaq formatting; viaq-k8s contains openshift specific code such as the location of the logging and code to get the meta data from kubernetes.
Elasticsearch is only an expected output, for now.
So, viaq + viaq-k8s also could skip the output configuration in the inventory file and just do `call elasticsearch`.
